Digital Asset Network RFC (#20)
tari-project/tari: RFC/src/RFC-0300_DAN.md

that the rules of the asset contracts are enforced.
* VNs form a peer-to-peer communication network that together defines the Tari [Digital Asset Network] (DAN)
* VNs register themselves on the base layer and commit collateral to prevent Sybil attacks.
* Scalability is achieved by sacrificing decentralisation. Not *all* VNs manage *every* asset. Assets are managed by
  subsets of the DAN, called VN committees. These committees reach consensus on DA state amongst themselves.
* VNs earn fees for their efforts.
* Digital asset contracts are not Turing complete, but are instantiated by [Asset Issuer]s (AIs) using Digital Asset templates that are defined
  in the DAN protocol code.

### Digital Assets

* Digital asset contracts are *not* Turing complete, but are selected from a set of [DigitalAssetTemplate]s that govern
  the behaviour of each contract type. e.g. there could be a Single-Use Token template for simple ticketing systems; a
  Coupon template for loyalty programmes and so on.
* The template system is intended to be highly flexible and additional templates can be added to the protocol periodically.

> * Asset issuers can register TLDIs (top-level digital issuer) names on the base chain to help disambiguate similar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Asset issuers can register Top-Level Digital Issuer (TLDI) names on the base chain to help disambiguate similar
```

Perhaps TLDI should go into the glossary too

  contracts and improve the signal-to-noise ratio from scam- or copy-cat contracts.

> An [Asset Issuer] (AI) will issue a Digital Assets by constructing a contract from on of the supported set of [DigitalAssetTemplate]s. The AI will choose

Reviewer: typo: on
```suggestion
An [Asset Issuer] (AI) will issue a Digital Assets by constructing a contract from one of the supported set of [DigitalAssetTemplate]s. The AI will choose
```

 how large the committee of Validator Nodes will be for this DA and have the option to nominate [Trusted Node]s to be part of the VN committee for the DA.

> Any remaining spots on the committee will be filled by permissionless VNs that are selected randomly by the DAN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any remaining spots on the committee will be filled by permissionless VNs that are selected according to a `CommitteeSelectionStrategy`.
```

I think that it would be beneficial to have committee selection configurable by the AI. Example strategies -- in addition to a purely random selection -- might include:
* Nodes that have <nnn ms latency
* Nodes that have at least NNN Tari available as collateral
etc

Author: Yes! of course. included this suggestion and elaborated on the strategy.

### Validator Nodes

[Validator Node]s form the basis of the second layer DAN. All actions on this network take place by interacting with VN's. Some examples of actions
that VNs will facilitate are:
* Issuing a [Digital Asset],
* querying the state of [Digital Asset] and its constituent [tokens],
* issuing and instruction to change the state of a [Digital Asset] or [tokens].

> VNs will also perform archival function for the assets they manage. The lifetime of these archives and the fee structure for this function is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VNs will also perform archival functions for the assets they manage. The lifetime of these archives and the fee structure for this function is
```

still being discussed.

#### Registration
VNs register themselves on the [Base Layer] using a special [transaction] type. The registration [transaction] type
requires spending of a certain minimum amount of [Tari coin], the ([RegistrationCollateral]), that has a time-lock on the
output for a minimum amount of time ([RegistrationPeriod]) as well as some metadata, such as the VNs public key and a generated Node ID. The
details of this transaction are not confidential and are publicly auditable. The Node ID is generated during registration to prevent mining

> of VN public keys that can be used to manipulate routing on the DAN.

Reviewer: Some further suggestions on the details of this transaction:
* The blinding factor for the Registration transaction is the private key that the VN node will use to sign every instruction that it executes for the duration of its `RegistrationTerm` (or period)
* I've realised that the transaction *can* in fact be confidential, if the range_proof is modified to prove that the registration fee is in the range `[RegistrationCollateral; 2^64]`

Author: Added

Author: Removed the part about confidentiality, I think that might take some more thought because I think some parts of the transaction will definitely need to be auditable by the second layer?

Reviewer: Agreed. Let's punt this.

> VNs may spend this Tari back to themselves which will end their registration.

Reviewer: This is a bit unclear I feel. It's not the spending of the funds to themselves that ends the `CollateralPeriod` but the time-locked nature of the TX. Furthermore, having the time-lock on the collateral expire need not _necessarily_ end their registration (although we'll probably design the two periods to coincide)

Author: Elaborated a bit more.

Requiring nodes to register themselves serves two purposes:
* Makes VN Sybil attacks expensive,
* Provides an authoritative "central-but-not-centralised" registry of validator nodes from the base layer.

> #### Validation of instructions

Reviewer: What do you think about calling this `execution` rather than validation, given what VNs actually do?

Author: Agreed.

* VNs accept digital asset [Instructions] from clients and peers. [Instructions] allow for creating, updating, and
  expiring digital assets on the DAN.
* VNs provide additional collateral when accepting an offer to manage an asset, which is stored in a multi-signature
  contract on the base layer. This collateral can be taken from the VN if it is proven that the VN engaged in
  malicious behaviour.
* VNs participate in fraud proof validations in the event of consensus disputes (which could result in the malicious VN's
  collateral being slashed).
* Digital asset metadata (e.g. large images) are managed by VNs, but whether the data is considered part of the state
  (and thus checkpointed) or out of state depends on the type of digital asset contract employed.

#### Checkpoints
VNs periodically post checkpoint summaries to the [base layer] for each asset that they are managing. The checkpoints will form an immutable
record of the [Digital Asset] state on the base-layer. There will be two types of checkpoints:
* An opening checkpoint will:
  * Specify the members of the VN committee.
  * Lock up the collateral for the committee members for this checkpoint period.

>   * Collect the fee pool for this checkpoint period from the Asset Issuer into a Multi-Sig UTXO under the control of the committee.

Reviewer: This is the first mention of `fee pool`. It would be helpful if there was some more explanation of this concept prior to this reference

Author: Indeed, I moved the Fees section above this and elaborated a bit on them.

  This can be a top-up of the fees or a whole new fee pool.

* A closing checkpoint will:
  * Summarize the Digital Asset state on the base layer.
  * Release the fee pay outs.
  * Release the collateral for the committee members for this checkpoint period.

>   * Allow for committee members to resign from the committee

Reviewer: Is the opening checkpoint done at asset creation? and closing at asset "retirement"? 

Or are there 2 checkpoints for each CP period? In which case, you could probably halve the number of checkpoints, no? Instead of

`O------CO--------CO-------C`

You could have

`O-------I--------I---------C`

O = Opening Checkpoint
I = Intermediate checkpoint
C = Closing checkpoint

Author: But point taken I will reword the intermediate checkpoints.

Author: I also added a mermaid diagram to clarify

#### Consensus
Committees of VNs will use a [ConsensusStrategy] to manage the process of
* Propogating signed instructions between members of the committee.
* Determining when the threshold has been reached for an instruction to be considered valid.

Part of the [ConsensusStrategy] will be mechanisms for detecting actions by [Bad Actor]s. The nature of the enforcement actions that can be taken
against bad actors are still to be decided.

#### Fees

> The distribution of the fees for work done by VNs during a checkpoint period will be agreed upon by the committee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distribution of the fees for work done by VNs during a checkpoint period will be algorithmically determined by the committee.
```

> The committee members will sign for the fee payments based on the respective work done by the committee members. Remaining fees will

Reviewer: It seems like you've got some predetermined ideas / assumptions around fees that aren't evident in this document.

Author: Agreed, I rather took out the speculative stuff and just stuck to the high level idea.

roll over into the next checkpoint periods fee pool.

The exact mechanism for the Multi-Signature address on the base layer and who pays the various fees is still under discussion.

### Network communication
The VNs will communicate using a peer-to-peer (P2P) network. To facilitate this this VNs must perform the following functions:

> * VNs must maintain a list of peers, and which assets each peer is managing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* VNs MUST maintain a list of peers, and which assets each peer is managing.
```

etc.

> * VNs must relay [instructions] to interested peers.

Reviewer: Should we define "interested peers" more precisely here? Would it be a superset of the committee ever? If not, maybe just say "committee members" here

Any remaining spots on the committee will be filled by permissionless VNs that are selected according to a [CommitteeSelectionStrategy]. This ia a strategy
for the DAN to algorithmically select candidates for the committee from the available registered Validator Nodes. The VNs will need accept the nomination
to become part of the committee by putting up the specified collateral.

### Validator Nodes

[Validator Node]s form the basis of the second layer DAN. All actions on this network take place by interacting with VN's. Some examples of actions
that VNs will facilitate are:
* Issuing a [Digital Asset],
* querying the state of [Digital Asset] and its constituent [tokens],
* issuing and instruction to change the state of a [Digital Asset] or [tokens].

VNs will also perform archival functions for the assets they manage. The lifetime of these archives and the fee structure for this function is
still being discussed.

#### Registration
VNs register themselves on the [Base Layer] using a special [transaction] type. The registration [transaction] type

> requires spending of a certain minimum amount of [Tari coin], the ([RegistrationCollateral]), that has a time-lock on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requires the spending of a certain minimum amount of [Tari coin], the ([RegistrationCollateral]), that has a time-lock on the
```

output for a minimum amount of time ([RegistrationTerm]) as well as some metadata, such as the VNs public key and a generated Node ID. The Node ID is generated
during registration to prevent mining of VN public keys that can be used to manipulate routing on the DAN. The blinding factor for the Registration transaction is the private key

> that the VN node will use to sign every instruction that it executes for the duration of its [RegistrationTerm] (or period).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the VN node will use to sign every instruction that it executes for the duration of its [RegistrationTerm].
```

🤣 I addded the "or period" in case you didn't want to change to `RegistrationTerm`

> VNs may unregister their VN by spending the Tari from this UTXO, whose timelock will have expired after the [RegistrationTerm] minimum time has elapsed.

Reviewer: Maybe we should punt this to a sub-RFC. My thinking is that VNs _don't have to do anything_ to deregister. They simply don't re-register when the time-lock expires. 

Keeping your status as a VN means re-registering after every `RegistrationTerm` expires. The benefits are that
* the register self-cleans (we don't rely on VNs to actively deregister)
* it's a sort of ping from the VN that "yes I'm still around"

The whole thing is roughly analogous to using letsencrypt ssl certs.

and reside in a UTXO that is accessible by the committee. The exact mechanism for the the payment of the fees by the committee and who pays the various
types of fees is still under discussion.

#### Checkpoints
VNs periodically post checkpoint summaries to the [base layer] for each asset that they are managing. The checkpoints will form an immutable
record of the [Digital Asset] state on the base-layer. There will be two types of checkpoints:
* An Opening checkpoint (OC) will:
  * Specify the members of the VN committee.
  * Lock up the collateral for the committee members for this checkpoint period.
  * Collect the fee pool for this checkpoint period from the Asset Issuer into a Multi-Sig UTXO under the control of the committee.
  This can be a top-up of the fees or a whole new fee pool.

* A Closing checkpoint (CC) will:
  * Summarize the Digital Asset state on the base layer.
  * Release the fee pay outs.
  * Release the collateral for the committee members for this checkpoint period.
  * Allow for committee members to resign from the committee

> After an DA is issued there will immediately be an Opening checkpoint. After a checkpoint period there will then be a Closing checkpoint followed

Reviewer: My gut says we could run into issues doing it like this (race conditions being one), but it's something that needs to be fleshed out in a sub-RFC anyway, and before this RFC hits `stable`

Author: Yes, I am going to leave this as is for now as the nature of the checkpoints is still a big question we need to figure out but there will be checkpoints.

until the end of the asset's lifetime where there will be a final Closing checkpoint that will be followed by the retirement of the asset.

<div class="mermaid">
graph LR;
    subgraph Asset Issuance
    IssueAsset-->OC1;
    end
    OC1-->CC1;
    subgraph Intermediate Checkpoint
    CC1-->OC2;
    end
    OC2-->CC2;
    subgraph Intermediate Checkpoint
    CC2-->OC3;
    end
    OC3-->CC3;
    subgraph Asset Retirement
    CC3-->RetireAsset;
    end

</div>

#### Consensus
Committees of VNs will use a [ConsensusStrategy] to manage the process of
* Propogating signed instructions between members of the committee.
* Determining when the threshold has been reached for an instruction to be considered valid.

Part of the [ConsensusStrategy] will be mechanisms for detecting actions by [Bad Actor]s. The nature of the enforcement actions that can be taken
against bad actors are still to be decided.

### Network communication
The VNs will communicate using a peer-to-peer (P2P) network. To facilitate this this VNs must perform the following functions:
* VNs MUST maintain a list of peers, and which assets each peer is managing.

> * VNs MUST relay [instructions] to to members of the committee that is managing the relevant asset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * VNs MUST relay [instructions] to members of the committee that is managing the relevant asset.
```

* VNs earn fees for their efforts.
* Digital asset contracts are not Turing complete, but are instantiated by [Asset Issuer]s (AIs) using Digital Asset templates that are defined
  in the DAN protocol code.

### Digital Assets

* Digital asset contracts are *not* Turing complete, but are selected from a set of [DigitalAssetTemplate]s that govern
  the behaviour of each contract type. e.g. there could be a Single-Use Token template for simple ticketing systems; a
  Coupon template for loyalty programmes and so on.
* The template system is intended to be highly flexible and additional templates can be added to the protocol periodically.
* Asset issuers can register Top-Level Digital Issuer (TLDI) names on the base chain to help disambiguate similar
  contracts and improve the signal-to-noise ratio from scam- or copy-cat contracts.

An [Asset Issuer] (AI) will issue a Digital Assets by constructing a contract from one of the supported set of [DigitalAssetTemplate]s. The AI will choose
 how large the committee of Validator Nodes will be for this DA and have the option to nominate [Trusted Node]s to be part of the VN committee for the DA.

> Any remaining spots on the committee will be filled by permissionless VNs that are selected according to a [CommitteeSelectionStrategy]. This ia a strategy

Reviewer 3: This feels very dangerous to me, I am of the opinion that its either nominate all VN's or all are selected CommitteeSelectionStrategy. 

The problem of selecting some and not other is you open up the randomly selected node to be attacked. For example we have 2 nominated nodes and one randomly selected node. The nominated nodes are chosen bad actors. 

1. Selected nodes A and B which are bad actors make a bad unlawful change to the asset. 
2. Randomly selected node C, makes a good lawful change. 
3. In the committee Node C is the odd one out, A and B flag him as dishonest. 
4. A and B can then try to steal the collateral of C.

Author: This is where the Fraud Proof process could be used by the permissionless node. But yes perhaps its all permissioned  or all permissionless.

> for the DAN to algorithmically select candidates for the committee from the available registered Validator Nodes. The VNs will need accept the nomination

Author: I believe the to is on the next line

> for the DAN to algorithmically select candidates for the committee from the available registered Validator Nodes. The VNs will need accept the nomination

Author: Fixed

> for the DAN to algorithmically select candidates for the committee from the available registered Validator Nodes. The VNs will need to accept the nomination

Author: Agreed, rather than speculate on these though I think this best left for the more detailed RFCs

to become part of the committee by putting up the specified collateral.

### Validator Nodes

[Validator Node]s form the basis of the second layer DAN. All actions on this network take place by interacting with VN's. Some examples of actions
that VNs will facilitate are:

> * Issuing a [Digital Asset],

Author: Is it a contradiction? The AI issues the asset, the VN's facilitate this action.

* querying the state of [Digital Asset] and its constituent [tokens],

> * issuing and instruction to change the state of a [Digital Asset] or [tokens].

Author: fixed

VNs will also perform archival functions for the assets they manage. The lifetime of these archives and the fee structure for this function is
still being discussed.

#### Registration
VNs register themselves on the [Base Layer] using a special [transaction] type. The registration [transaction] type
requires the spending of a certain minimum amount of [Tari coin], the ([RegistrationCollateral]), that has a time-lock on the
output for a minimum amount of time ([RegistrationTerm]) as well as some metadata, such as the VNs public key and a generated Node ID. The Node ID is generated
during registration to prevent mining of VN public keys that can be used to manipulate routing on the DAN. The blinding factor for the Registration transaction is the private key

> that the VN node will use to sign every instruction that it executes for the duration of its [RegistrationTerm].

Reviewer 4: Can it be 1s?

> that the VN node will use to sign every instruction that it executes for the duration of its [RegistrationTerm].

Author: Will address in the more detailed RFCs, keeping it vague here on purpose.

> Once a VNs [RegistrationTerm] has expired so will this specific VN registration. The UTXO timelock will have elapsed so the [RegistrationCollateral] can be reclaimed and a new VN registration

Reviewer 4: So intentionally no de-registration possible before the timelock has expired?

Author: Yes, otherwise it is easy for an attacked to reuse collateral by deregistering and re-registering in quick succession.

Requiring nodes to register themselves serves two purposes:
* Makes VN Sybil attacks expensive,
* Provides an authoritative "central-but-not-centralised" registry of validator nodes from the base layer.

#### Execution of instructions
VNs are expected to manage the state of digital assets on behalf of digital asset issuers. They receive fees as reward
for doing this.
* Digital assets consist of an initial state plus a set of state transition rules. These rules are set by the Tari
  protocol, but will usually provide parameters that must be specified by the [Asset Issuer].
* The set of VNs that participate in managing state of a specific DA is called a [Committee]. A committee is selected during the asset
issuance process and membership of the committee can be updated at [Checkpoint]s.
* It is the VNs responsibility to ensure that every state change in a digital asset conforms to the contract's rules.
* VNs accept digital asset [Instructions] from clients and peers. [Instructions] allow for creating, updating, and

>   expiring digital assets on the DAN.

Reviewer 4: Add _archiving_ as another instruction type.

* VNs provide additional collateral when accepting an offer to manage an asset, which is stored in a multi-signature

>   contract on the base layer. This collateral can be taken from the VN if it is proven that the VN engaged in

Reviewer 4: Mimblewimble cannot store contracts on the base layer

Author: reworded

  malicious behaviour.
* VNs participate in fraud proof validations in the event of consensus disputes (which could result in the malicious VN's
  collateral being slashed).

> * Digital asset metadata (e.g. large images) are managed by VNs, but whether the data is considered part of the state

Reviewer 3: I think we must make provision to manage these on a different provided server as well, managed by the AI. Hashes of these should still be managed by the VN's thou.

Author: Reworded this to make it clearer.

  (and thus checkpointed) or out of state depends on the type of digital asset contract employed.

#### Fees
Fees will be paid to VNs based on the amount of work they did during a checkpoint period. The fees will be paid from a fee pool which will be collected
and reside in a UTXO that is accessible by the committee. The exact mechanism for the the payment of the fees by the committee and who pays the various
types of fees is still under discussion.

> #### Checkpoints

Reviewer 3: I see that there is a closing and opening checkpoint. We can probably link a closing to an opening statement thus reducing some the data stored. But I see Digital Asset state is missing from opening, which makes sense as you can only look at the closing. But at the beginning we need to store the initial state to begin from as there would not have been a closing checkpoint before this.

Author: The initial state would be setup in the Issue Asset portion. The exact nature of the checkpoints will need more depth but I did collect the inner Opening and Closing checkpoints into a box called Intermediate checkpoint to signify the idea that they could become a single operation.

> #### Checkpoints

Reviewer 3: I see there is not cut-through or pruning mentioned in the checkpoints. We will need to implement this. 
But we need to answer questions as how long/deep to we save them?

Author: I believe that level of detail will be covered in the sub-RFC that deals with the details of the checkpoints, of which there is still much to discuss and decide.

VNs periodically post checkpoint summaries to the [base layer] for each asset that they are managing. The checkpoints will form an immutable
record of the [Digital Asset] state on the base-layer. There will be two types of checkpoints:
* An Opening checkpoint (OC) will:
  * Specify the members of the VN committee.
  * Lock up the collateral for the committee members for this checkpoint period.
  * Collect the fee pool for this checkpoint period from the Asset Issuer into a Multi-Sig UTXO under the control of the committee.
  This can be a top-up of the fees or a whole new fee pool.

* A Closing checkpoint (CC) will:
  * Summarize the Digital Asset state on the base layer.
  * Release the fee pay outs.
  * Release the collateral for the committee members for this checkpoint period.
  * Allow for committee members to resign from the committee

After an DA is issued there will immediately be an Opening checkpoint. After a checkpoint period there will then be a Closing checkpoint followed
immediately by an Opening checkpoint for the next period, we will call this set of checkpoints an Intermediate checkpoint. This will continue

> until the end of the asset's lifetime where there will be a final Closing checkpoint that will be followed by the retirement of the asset.

Reviewer 4: I agree that this mechanism has the potential to create too much overhead. Reword to suggest both
O -- CO -- CO -- CO -- CO -- CO -- C
and 
O -- I -- I -- CO -- I -- I -- C
are possible candidates for checkpointing and that this is still under discussion.
